
Here’s a list of commonly used Spring Boot annotations along with their purposes:

### Core Annotations
1. **@SpringBootApplication**: Indicates the main class for a Spring Boot application, combining `@Configuration`, `@EnableAutoConfiguration`, and `@ComponentScan`.
2. **@Configuration**: Marks a class as a source of bean definitions.
3. **@Bean**: Declares a method that produces a bean to be managed by the Spring container.
4. **@Component**: Indicates that a class is a Spring-managed component.
5. **@Service**: Marks a class as a service layer component containing business logic.
6. **@Repository**: Designates a class as a Data Access Object (DAO) that interacts with the database.
7. **@Controller**: Defines a class as a controller in Spring MVC, handling HTTP requests.
8. **@RestController**: Combines `@Controller` and `@ResponseBody`, simplifying the creation of RESTful web services.

### Dependency Injection Annotations
9. **@Autowired**: Automatically injects dependencies into Spring beans.
10. **@Qualifier**: Specifies which bean to inject when multiple candidates exist.
11. **@Value**: Injects values from property files or environment variables into fields.

### Request Mapping Annotations
12. **@RequestMapping**: Maps HTTP requests to specific handler methods.
13. **@GetMapping**: Maps HTTP GET requests to handler methods.
14. **@PostMapping**: Maps HTTP POST requests to handler methods.
15. **@PutMapping**: Maps HTTP PUT requests to handler methods.
16. **@DeleteMapping**: Maps HTTP DELETE requests to handler methods.
17. **@PatchMapping**: Maps HTTP PATCH requests to handler methods.

### Parameter Binding Annotations
18. **@PathVariable**: Binds method parameters to template variables in the URI.
19. **@RequestBody**: Binds the body of an HTTP request to a method parameter.
20. **@ResponseBody**: Indicates that the return value of a method should be bound to the web response body.
21. **@RequestParam**: Binds request parameters to method parameters.
22. **@RequestHeader**: Binds HTTP headers to method parameters.

### Other Useful Annotations
23. **@EnableScheduling**: Enables support for scheduled tasks in Spring applications.
24. **@Scheduled**: Marks methods for scheduled execution at fixed intervals or cron expressions.

### JPA Annotations
25. **@Entity**: Indicates that a class is an entity and is mapped to a database table.
26. **@Table**: Specifies the table name in the database for an entity class.
27. **@Column**: Defines properties of columns in the database.

