Types of Annotations in Spring Boot
Spring Boot extensively utilizes annotations to simplify development and configuration. While there's a vast array, let's focus on the most commonly used ones categorized by their purpose:   

Core Annotations
@SpringBootApplication: A composite annotation combining @ComponentScan, @Configuration, and @EnableAutoConfiguration.
@Configuration: Defines a Java class as a source of bean definitions.   
@Bean: Indicates a method that returns a bean to be managed by the Spring container.   
@Component: Marks a class as a bean candidate for auto-detection.   
@Service: A stereotype annotation for service classes.   
@Repository: A stereotype annotation for data access objects (DAOs).   
Web Annotations
@Controller: Marks a class as a web request handler.   
@RestController: A combination of @Controller and @ResponseBody, used for RESTful services.
@RequestMapping: Maps HTTP requests to handler methods.   
@GetMapping, @PostMapping, @PutMapping, @DeleteMapping, @PatchMapping: Specialized versions of @RequestMapping.
@RequestParam, @PathVariable, @RequestBody: Bind request parameters to method arguments.   
@ResponseBody: Indicates that the return value of a method should be written directly to the HTTP response body.   
Dependency Injection Annotations
@Autowired: Autowires beans by type.   
@Qualifier: Specifies the bean name for autowiring when there are multiple candidates.
Other Common Annotations
@EnableAutoConfiguration: Enables Spring Boot's auto-configuration mechanism.   
@ComponentScan: Tells Spring to scan for components in specified packages.   
@PropertySource, @Value: For accessing properties from external configuration files.   
@EnableJpaRepositories: Enables Spring Data JPA repositories.   