Okay, here's a roadmap to learning Spring Boot : 

**Phase 1: Core Spring and Spring Boot Fundamentals (1-2 weeks)**

1. **Review Java Essentials:** Brush up on core Java concepts:
    * Object-Oriented Programming (OOP) principles (encapsulation, inheritance, polymorphism).
    * Collections framework (Lists, Maps, Sets).
    * Exception handling.
    * Generics.
    * Lambda expressions and streams.
    * I/O operations.

2. **Introduction to Spring Framework:** Understand the core concepts of the Spring Framework:
    * Dependency Injection (DI): How Spring manages the dependencies between your objects.
    * Inversion of Control (IoC): How Spring containers create and manage your beans.
    * Aspect-Oriented Programming (AOP) (basic understanding).

3. **Setting up Your Development Environment:**
    * Install Java Development Kit (JDK).
    * Choose an IDE (Integrated Development Environment) like IntelliJ IDEA, Eclipse, or NetBeans.
    * Set up Gradle (you already have basic knowledge).

4. **Spring Boot Basics:**
    * What is Spring Boot?  Its goals and advantages (auto-configuration, embedded servers, production-ready features).
    * Spring Boot Starters: How they simplify dependency management.
    * Spring Boot CLI (Command Line Interface):  For quickly creating projects.
    * Spring Initializr: A web tool for generating Spring Boot project structures.

5. **Your First Spring Boot Application:**
    * Create a simple Spring Boot application using Spring Initializr or the CLI.
    * Understand the `@SpringBootApplication` annotation.
    * Run your application.

**Phase 2: Building Web Applications with Spring Boot (2-3 weeks)**

1. **Spring Boot Starter Web:** Learn about the `spring-boot-starter-web` dependency and how it enables building web applications.

2. **Controllers:**
    * `@RestController`:  For creating RESTful controllers (returning JSON or XML).
    * `@Controller`: For creating controllers that return views (HTML).
    * `@RequestMapping`: For mapping URLs to handler methods.
    * Request parameters (`@RequestParam`, `@PathVariable`).
    * Request body (`@RequestBody`).

3. **RESTful APIs:**
    * Designing RESTful APIs.
    * HTTP methods (GET, POST, PUT, DELETE).
    * Status codes.
    * Handling JSON requests and responses.
    * Building CRUD (Create, Read, Update, Delete) operations.

4. **Handling Responses:**
    * `ResponseEntity`: For fine-grained control over HTTP responses (status codes, headers, body).
    * Returning JSON data.
    * Handling errors.

5. **Testing REST APIs:**
    * Using tools like Postman or curl to test your APIs.
    * Writing unit tests for your controllers.

**Phase 3: Data Persistence (2-3 weeks)**

1. **Spring Data JPA:**
    * Introduction to JPA and Hibernate.
    * Setting up Spring Data JPA.
    * Entities: Defining your data model.
    * Repositories: Simplifying database access.
    * CRUD operations with JPA.
    * Querying data (using derived queries, JPQL, or native queries).
    * Transactions.

2. **Database Configuration:**
    * Configuring database connections (using `application.properties` or `application.yml`).
    * Using embedded databases (like H2) for development.

3. **Other Data Persistence Options (if needed):**
    * Spring Data MongoDB (for NoSQL databases).
    * Spring JDBC (for lower-level database access).

**Phase 4: Security (1-2 weeks)**

1. **Spring Security Basics:**
    * Authentication (verifying user identity).
    * Authorization (controlling access to resources).
    * Spring Security configuration.

2. **Implementing Authentication:**
    * Basic authentication.
    * Form-based login.
    * OAuth 2.0 (if needed).
    * JWT (JSON Web Tokens) (for REST APIs).

3. **Implementing Authorization:**
    * Role-based access control.
    * Access control expressions.

**Phase 5: Advanced Topics and Best Practices (Ongoing)**

1. **Aspect-Oriented Programming (AOP):**  Learn more about AOP for handling cross-cutting concerns (logging, security, transactions).

2. **Exception Handling:** Global exception handling with `@ControllerAdvice`.

3. **Validation:** Using JSR 380 annotations for data validation.

4. **Testing:** Writing comprehensive unit and integration tests.

5. **Caching:**  Using Spring's caching support to improve performance.

6. **Messaging (if needed):**  Spring JMS or Spring Kafka for working with message queues.

7. **Actuator:** Monitoring and managing your application in production.

8. **Deployment:** Deploying your Spring Boot application to a cloud platform (AWS, Azure, Google Cloud) or a traditional server.

9. **Microservices (if needed):** Learn about Spring Cloud for building microservices.

**Resources:**

* **Official Spring Boot Documentation:** The best resource!
* **Spring.io:** Lots of tutorials and guides.
* **Baeldung:** Excellent articles on Spring and Spring Boot.
* **Books:** "Spring Boot in Action" by Craig Walls is a good starting point.

**Learning Tips:**

* **Hands-on practice:**  Build small projects to reinforce your learning.
* **Start simple:**  Don't try to learn everything at once. Focus on the core concepts first.
* **Break down complex tasks:** Divide large projects into smaller, manageable parts.
* **Don't be afraid to ask questions:**  Use online forums and communities to get help when you're stuck.

This roadmap provides a structured way to learn Spring Boot.  Remember that learning is an iterative process.  Don't be afraid to experiment, make mistakes, and learn from them.  Good luck!
